
+++
title = "How I learned how to learn how to code"
draft = false
date = "2018-05-07T23:35:01.000Z"

+++
I was reading the Turing Omnibus, doing some research into error correction, and
I learned about Hamming Codes. I might have understood the concept at the time,
but today, what I remember is the offhand comment my friend made about their
creator, Richard Hamming.

Oh you should watch his talk "You and Your Research"

At this point in my life, I'd been laid off form my first startup and was taking
a break to "get better at programming". My goal was vague, I admit. I loved
development and I'd worked very hard to get that first job (story at a later
point), but I realized about 10 months into working that I was spinning my
wheels. I was learning the libraries and could hook them together, but I was
playing with Duplos, mentally. I didn't have the deeper understanding of
computers that gave all that library code some context. I didn't understand what
it was doing at any sort of level but the most superficial. And I was aware that
the world in which I was traveling was moving faster and faster, which
effectively made me standing still or moving backwards[1].

"You and Your Research" is a brilliant, inspirational talk, which I've since
watched many times. But I'll focus on one point Hamming makes, which hit me like
a brick over the head.

Given two people of approximately the same ability and one person who works ten
percent more than the other, the latter will more than twice outproduce the
former. The more you know, the more you learn; the more you learn, the more you
can do; the more you can do, the more the opportunity - it is very much like
compound interest.

He's actually making two points here, which I'll unpack.

Firstly, because because knowledge is compounding, knowing more is a virtuous
cycle. And in terms of what you choose to learn, there's a spectrum from
essentially useless to rather useful. And what I mean by useful knowledge here
are things that don't really change all that quickly and things you can build
on. In fact not all knowledge is actually compound useful (or maybe if its not
compounding knowledge its actually just trivia :thinking_face:). Thus, you
should work hard to identify knowledge that does compound.

So, for example, learning the latest Javascript framework du-jour or the Webpack
v3 module apis, would not be useful knowledge because it will likely be
obsoleted by a PR from the next boot camp grad hire at your job before you've
finished this paragraph. Not to say you shouldn't learn it, but I would strongly
suggest learning only as little as necessary to get your job done (Just in Time 
learning). Instead, focus on really learning Javascript, the language. Or focus
on learning Programming Languages  in the abstract. Or focus on learning C (what
a shockingly elitist thing to say ðŸ˜±). Or learn assembly because you'll actually
have to learn how computer work to understand what's even going on (I'll grant
you that some crazy freaks will tell me that even assembly is a "huge
abstraction" and I suppose they'd be kinda right, but who wants to have a drink
with them at a party....).

This corpus of knowledge is generally called serious tone  Computer Science,
which is neither about computers nor is a science (sic(p)). That being said, its
useful great stuff, especially if you want to stop spinning your wheels and
start getting somewhere. I'll tell you that stepping of the treadmill and
ambling through the dustier sections of CS in the library, picking up Olde Books
(like "Programming Pearls" or "TCP/IP Illustrated") taught me things that no
React tutorial ever could. This old stuff gave me, for lack of a better term,
intuition. And its since proved really useful working in lots of domains, from
shite frontend webapps to infrastructure to devops, from mac to linux to
windows.

Now I'm not saying that the particulars don't matter; they really do. Knowing
the platforms you're working on is crucial to doing good work. But what I am
saying, is that spending some time with the deeper subjects will pay dividends.
Dividends in your ability to read unfamiliar languages and codebases and
paradigms, dividends in your ability to debug problems, and dividends in your
holistic enjoyment of your work, because you'll start of see the larger picture
instead of feeling like you're constantly falling behind. That's what we mean by
perspective. And I'm not there yet, but I feel like I've found the pointer to
the moon.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The other point Hamming was making in the above quote is about the virtues of
drive and hard work; these are the things that it takes to succeed and do the
good stuff. No substitutes for putting in the time on the right  things, to be
sure, but he's also making a deeper point about understanding the keys to
success.

I took from this that my achievements were timebound (i.e. We're going to die
some day and have a limited amount of time to do something good), and so
focusing on leverage (activities and process that have a multiplying effect on
my knowledge, output, or impact) was essential to using that time wisely.

On learning: lots of smart people have studied how to more effectively learn
(Barbara Oakley in particular is someone you should look up). Learning more
effectively makes your time spent learning literally have a greater output.

Spend time understanding the best resources to learn from and the experts from
whom you can learn, especially those who sift, synthesize, and summarize
information (Shane Parrish calls this Mastering The Best Of What Other People
Have Already Figured Out). These people are literally doing the work for you and
you should greedily take advantage of that fact.

Constantly, ruthlessly cut wasteful activities out of your life and seek to do
things more time and energy efficiently. For example, I read "Body by Science",
thanks to a recommendation by Nassim Taleb, and saved myself untold hours of
boring exercise.

Quit social media. Do it now. You'll thank me in like three years when you
realized what a head-fuck it is (admittedly I'm still on Twitter).

I'm not arguing for a life-hacks style approach, but for simply recognizing that
achievement takes great effort and sacrifice and that using your time well and
making space in your life for that work are necessary and important steps along
a journey of continual, steady upward progress. Take the long view and you'll
see far.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 1. This, I subsequently learned, is a Red Queen situation, well treated by 
    Farnam Street [https://www.fs.blog/2012/10/the-red-queen-effect/]  â†©ï¸Ž
