
+++
title: "Important Problems"
draft: true
date: "2018-05-08T00:01:00.000Z"

+++
Richard Hamming asked the chemists in the Bell Labs Cafeteria:

What are the most important problems in your field? And why aren't you working
on them?

The ever brilliant Haroon Meer got me thinking about this question recently;
what are the important problems these days? And why aren't I working on them?

In technology, so much seems driven by the market, advertising, and hype. I
suppose that's better than war being the engine, but it somehow seems hollow.
Technology itself seems to advance for its own sake and pure exploration can be
exciting, as in science. But has that really happened much after the PARC days?
I don't really think so.

“The best minds of my generation are thinking about how to make people click
ads.”

And so what's a person to do? It certainly seems that the most important
problems facing humanity are tied up with technology: Can technology extricate
us from the downward spiral of climate change and environmental degradation? Can
online communities and governance models enabled by pervasive communication
technology preserve or foster democracy in some meaningful sense, or will they
simpy sow the seeds of its own destruction? Can technology help people find a
new sense of meaning outside of the natural communities and bonds it has had
some part in severing or will it doom us to a hyper-connection devoid of any
substance?

I don't have answers to these questions; I don't actually think I (or my fellow
programmers) am equipped to adress these issue (certainly not on my own). But
its certainly incumbent upon us to engage with the meaning and impact of our
work. And maybe that engagement, in itself, is a grainule of an important
problem: How can software engineers minimize the harm their work produces and
how can they produce that work in a minimully harmful way?

Certainly having job that helps me support a family is deeply meaningful; and
working at a company that share some of my values or at least seems to minimally
cut against my grain is a start. And maybe that's okay for now. I'm a bit over
3.5 years into a career in software; I taught myself to do this with the help
of
a blacksmith
[http://joshuakemp.blogspot.com/2013/11/how-blacksmith-learned-to-code-and-9.html]
 (I literally googled "how to learn how to code" and just followed his advice).
And even though I beat up on myself, if I'm honest I feel like I'm progressing
at an acceptable trajectory. But I want to ultimately do high impact work in
this field or, as someone so aptly put it, be a chef instead of a cook. Or else
why bother? And so for now, I have an important problem: I have to actually find
 the important problems. I'll let you know when I figure them out.
